the Yucatan's a strip of essentially
pure limestone that separates the
Caribbean from the Gulf of Mexico and
it's got all the ingredients you might
think you need for a rich and diverse
ecosystem the tropical Sun warms the
forest delivering precious energy to
each and every leaf oxygen escapes from
the plants and trees which is breathed
in by the forest animals and where they
can each of them draws deeply from the
region's hidden water supply but there
are some of the ingredients you need to
grow this tropical forests that are far
more important than others
you might think that this place would be
awash with water and it does rain a lot
and it's incredibly humid but actually
there are no surface rivers at all on
the Yucatan Peninsula because the water
just seeps into the porous limestone
that's where these things come in these
are cenotes they're caverns dissolved
out of the limestone by the rain and
they collect water and they play a vital
role in the ecosystem when the forage
changes when you get around a cenote
just listen to that those are frogs and
you don't hear those frogs anywhere else
in the forest just around the cenotes
the cenotes are flooded caves that have
been cut off from the outside world for
thousands of years
lilies troglodytic fish even the
occasional turtle all thrive around the
openings of these freshwater wells
as I head deeper into the cave the
temperature drops and the light fades
one by one the ingredients I depend upon
begin to disappear
yet even here far from the soil and air
strangely colored algae still find a
home in the water
there's one thing that unites every
former lives from the cenote tracks
every form of life had in the forest in
fact every form of life we've ever
discovered anywhere on planet Earth is
there it has to be wet
you